So those are the three
building blocks of it.
How do you then plan your design system
because it's quite an intimidating thing
building a design system.
It doesn't sound like
many of you have done it.
Some of you are trying to do it and
if you're trying to do it,
you know that it's scary.
So little bit of advice about how
to go about planning my first
piece of advice is don't buy
in a design system, right?
Is so tempting, right?
Because you can go out there and you can
find these design systems ready done all
the elements, all the components you want
all the colors and styles and everything.
It's all just there and I can just
go yeah, let's have that, right?
Now I'm talking from
the design point of view,
I can't comment from
a development point of view.
I know a lot of developers
use things like Bootstrap and
various other things and build on that.
I can't comment on whether
that is a good plan or not.
My gut says it isn't.
But who am I to judge when I'm not
a full-time developer anymore.
So why don't we wanna do it
from a design point of view?
Well, reason number one,
they're over engineered, right?
And that's not a criticism
of them they have to be,
they have to build a design system
that they can sell to anybody, right?
So that means they need
every single element or
component that you might ever need in it,
okay?
But your needs are probably for
only a small subset of all of that.
So you've got all this extra stuff in
there that you don't actually need there
and it just gets in the way basically and
causes confusion and difficulty, right?
And because it's got so much in and
it's so over-engineered for
your needs,
it takes forever to learn, right?
And get your head around how it's working.
And of course the mental model of
the person that created it is different to
your mental model and
how you're thinking about it.
And you're going, blimming heck, I've got
to kind of pick through all of this and
understand it and in the end, you get to a
point of going you know what I think it'd
be quicker to build my own, right?
And you can tell here that I'm
saying this from personal,
horrible [LAUGH] experience
of going down this road.
Also, they're gonna need
heavy customization, right?
So then you've got to understand how all
of these components interlink with one
another and how they reference one another
in order to be able to edit them and
customize them.
And that can be a challenge in its own,
right?
And in my experience, they can often
really result in bloated code as well.
Because again, you've got these
components built into the system that you
don't need in your use case,
but they're in there anyway.
And this design system gets passed
across to the developer and
if the developer isn't really on the ball
because he's too busy or whatever else,
you could easily end up with all this
stuff being built, you don't really need.
All of that said there is a caveat, right?
Which is that I do sometimes
buy a design system just to
speed up the creation of my
own design system, right?
So for example,
instead of creating an input box,
a radial box, all that kind of stuff.
I literally got a design
system that I bought ages ago.
I go in, grab the input box
shove it into my design system,
customize it the way I want and
add it in like that.
But I never would take one wholesale.
And even that, sometimes it's like,
I'll just do it myself.
So it's a false economy
at the end of the day.
Personally, I feel like it is maybe other
people have managed to make it work,
yeah
>> Well,
what about referencing the design
systems that are online?
I mean that's one of the other
things there's a lot of
an open source right now
like IBM's carbon design
>> Yeah, again I advise against
using those, right?
For all the reasons I've just listed.
>> For selectively, in terms of
designing a component and looking for
some practices, would that be [CROSSTALK]
>> Yeah, no sorry, I understand you.
I didn't understand the question.
Yeah, absolutely I often look
at other people and rip them of.
What is it?
We're building on
the shoulders of giants or
some other way of justifying the fact that
I'm just copying somebody else's work.
Yeah, no, I do that all the time.
>> Well, one advice about design systems
I heard, don't try to design it yourself.
Learn from what is there because whatever
you're gonna try to come up with probably
not gonna be the best.
>> Yeah, I would agree with that regards.
I'm talking more about
actually building it, right?
Actually creating the components and
the elements in something like Figma.
That if you buy in a design system that
you can just plug straight into Figma
that you're not gonna understand.
I'm happy to learn from other people.
I'm happy to copy from other
people where it's relevant, right?
But it is making no and
then I build it myself.
I recreate it in Figma myself so
that I understand what I've done.
And by doing it on almost a component
by component element by element basis.
I can choose to what what to include,
what to edit, or
what to go, I don't need that at all.
Well, when you buy something in,
you've got it all whether you like it or
not, right?
So that's my kind of logic, yeah.
>> And I can speak from
an engineering perspective too.
There's actually an article
that Josh Comeau wrote for
Smashing Magazine two years ago where
he said essentially the same thing.
It overcomplicates
the engineering process.
And that's the case with
when I've used material UI.
Initially it seems very easy to get
going but as the application scales and
you need to remove elements, or you wanna
customize behavior it quickly breaks down.
>> Yeah.
>> And then you have to throw everything
out and start from scratch so
>> Yeah, and
that's certainly been my experience
working with engineers that it reaches it.
But it's great for
getting started quick but
it causes problems further down the line.
And yeah, I'm not criticizing people that
buy in a solution to get going quick.
I understand that desire.
But from the design perspective,
I don't even think it allows
you to start quick really.
Because you're spend so
much time getting it into shape that
it probably won't work for you anyway.
The other thing I would say is
quite important is from a design
perspective is get buy-in upfront.
I need to clarify what I mean by that.
It's a bit of a misleading title,
to be honest with this slide.
What I mean is collaborate, right?
In the creation of a design system,
don't just go and
kinda create a load of
components in Figma.
But actually,
work alongside your developers on it and
engage with them and your product
managers and people like that.
Because they've all got to live with it,
right?
What works for you might not work
from a development point of view.
And if it's gonna make handover
difficult between design and
development, then you're losing half
the benefits of having a design system.
So it's kind of ridiculous to create
a Figma design system without at least
involving the developers.
So now, it might be the developers
are ahead of you, which is really annoying
when they are and they've already
created a kind of design system in code.
And in which case,
you really need to replicate that and
use that as the basis from for
building your elements.
Because they will be better than you so
just suck it up.
And then you obviously you can change the
appearance of those and stuff like that.
But developers, developers do this
kind of stuff by default design
system is essentially object orientated,
which has been around for like forever.
So when you suddenly get these
designers pop up and go, yes,
I think we need a design system.
And all the developers are sitting
there going, we've been doing that for
donkey's years.
So really listen to them and
get them involved in it as well.
And the other the other reason to get
buy-in upfront is just to sell the idea.
It's surely your executive and
your team can see the value of your
design system and
how it's gonna help the organization.
And talk through those cost savings and
the brand consistency in
the faster time to market.
It really helps to get buy-in but
oftentimes we will have
reluctant managers, right?
And we'll hit this barrier of, well,
we don't have time to do a design system.
We need to push out this next feature and
the never-ending kind of
thing that goes in there.
So and it can be really frustrating.
And it's like you're
just making everybody,
you're slowing us all down by
not having this thing in place.
So when that does happen and when I
really can't get anywhere with managers,
I just go stealth.
[LAUGH] So
a manager doesn't know whether mocking
up a design screen takes two hours or
three hours.
So make it take three hours and
then spend the extra hour turning every
element that you create on that
page into a component, right?
There's a lot of thoughts, right?
We need to have a design system project,
right?
Where we build our design
system from scratch but
you can actually build it as you go along,
right?
When you mockup a screen make sure you
turn, if you create a component make sure
it's then added to a component library and
that's the beginning of a design system.
It'll need to tidy up at some point but
that's further down the line, right?
And if you keep adding more and
more of these components to the design
system over the time you get
a design system by default really.
Just by spending a little bit longer
every time you mockup a screen.
There's also a good argument to say,
well actually maybe that's
the right way to do it anyway.
Because if you do a design
system project you sit down and
you have to come up with all
the components you need, right?
And so, what you end up doing is auditing
the existing website that takes ages.
You then build all those components and
then half of them you never use again.
Well, if you're only building
them as you require them,
actually you're only
building the ones you need.
There's a little bit of
groundwork with your styling.
That needs to be done separately and
your main elements.
But why even the elements you can kinda
do as you go, I need an input element.
Let's design an input element and
we'll put that cross in the design system.
Keep that for next time I need it, right?
So it's like squirreling away design
elements and when I want them later, yeah?
So just don't tell anyone.
It's my advice, just do it.